Key benefit: <3(logn) insertions, deletions, lookups, find-min, find-max, successor, predecessor when tree is balanced. Understand implementation using nodes and pointers. Be familiar with notion of balance, and operations maintaining balance. Know how to augment a binary search tree, e.g., interval trees and dynamic order statistics.


Binary search trees (BSTs) are used to store objects that are comparable. The underly¬ ing idea is to organize the objects in a binary tree in which the nodes satisfy the BST property: the key stored at any node is greater than or equal to the keys stored in its left subtree and less than or equal to the keys stored in its right subtree. Insertion and deletion can be implemented so that the height of the BST is <3(log n), leading to fast (<9(logn)) lookup and update times. AVL trees and red-black trees are BST implementations that support this form of insertion and deletion.
BSTs are a workhorse of data structures and can be used to solve almost every data structures problem reasonably efficiently. It is common to augment the BST to make it possible to manipulate more complicated data, e.g., intervals, and efficiently support more complex queries, e.g., the number of elements in a range.
As an example application of BSTs, consider the following problem. You are given a set of line segments. Each segment is a closed interval [li, r*] of the x-axis, a color, and a height. For simplicity assume no two segments whose intervals overlap have the same height. When the x-axis is viewed from above the color at point x on the x-axis is the color of the highest segment that includes x. (If no segment contains x, the color is blank.) You are to implement a function that computes the sequence of colors as seen from the top.
The key idea is to sort the endpoints of the line segments and do a sweep from left-to-right. As we do the sweep, we maintain a list of line segments that intersect the current position as well as the highest line and its color. To quickly lookup the highest line in a set of intersecting lines we keep the current set in a BST, with the interval's height as its key.
